[Music]
Nicholas steno is rarely heard of
outside intro to geology but anyone
hoping to understand life on earth
should see how steno expanded and
connected those very concepts earth life
and understanding born Niels Stenson in
1638 Denmark son of a goldsmith he was a
sickly kid whose school chums died of
plague he survived to cut up corpses as
an anatomist studying organs shared
across species
he found a duct in animal skulls that
sends saliva to the mouth he refuted de
cartes idea that only humans had a
pineal gland proving it wasn't the seat
of the soul arguably the debut of
neuroscience most remarkable for the
time was his method
steno never let ancient texts
Aristotelian metaphysics or Cartesian
deductions overrule empirical
experimental evidence his vision
uncluttered by speculation or
rationalization went deep stain Oh had
seen how gall stones form in wet organs
by accretion they obeyed molding
principles he knew from the Goldsmith
trade rules useful across disciplines
for understanding solids by their
structural relationships later the Grand
Duke of Tuscany had him dissect a shark
its teeth resembled tongue stones odd
rocks seen inside other rocks in Malta
and the mountains near Florence Pliny
the Elder old Roman naturalist said
these fell from the sky in the dark ages
folks said they were snake tongues
petrified by st. Paul steno saw that
tongue stones were shark teeth and vice
versa with the same signs of structural
growth figuring similar things are made
in similar ways he argued the ancient
teeth came from ancient sharks in waters
that formed rock around the teeth and
became mountains rock layers were once
layers of watery sediment which would
lay out horizontally one atop another
oldest up to newest
if mayors were deformed tilted cut by a
fault or a canyon that change came after
the layer formed sounds simple today
back then revolutionary he'd invented
stratigraphy and laid geologies
groundwork
by finding one origin for shark teeth
from two eras by stating natural laws
ruling the present also ruled the past
stay no planted seeds for
uniformitarianism the idea that the past
was shaped by processes observable today
in the 18th and 19th centuries English
uniformitarian geologists James Hutton
and Charles Lee L studied current very
slow rates of erosion and sedimentation
and realized the earth had to be way
older than the biblical guesstimate six
thousand years out of their work came
the rock cycle which combined with plate
tectonics in the mid 20th century to
give us the great molten crusting
quaking all encircling theory of the
earth from a gallstone
to a 4.5 billion year old planet now
think bigger take it to biology say you
see shark teeth in one layer and a
fossil of an organism you've never seen
under that the deeper fossils older yes
you now have evidence of the origin and
extinction of species over time get
uniformitarian may be a process still
active today caused changes not just in
rocks but in life might also explain
similarities and differences between
species found by anatomist Slyke stay no
it's a lot to ponder
but Charles Darwin had the time on a
long trip to the Galapagos reading a
copy of his friend Charles Lyell's
principles of geology which stain of
sort of founded sometimes giants stand
on the shoulders of curious little
people Nicholas steno helped evolve
evolution broke ground for geology and
showed how unbiased empirical
observation can cut across intellectual
borders to deepen our perspective his
finest accomplishment though maybe his
maxim casting the search for truth
beyond our senses and our current
understanding as the pursuit of the
beauty of the as yet unknown beautiful
is what we see more beautiful is what we
know most beautiful by far is what we
don't
you
[Music]